Functional: update coding guidelines and development documentation (#908)
GridTools/gt4py: CODING_GUIDELINES.md

# Coding Guidelines

## Code design

Designing software is a hard task which can be easily overlooked when you are working under tight deadlines or you are eager to implement some cool new feature. However, in the long term bad designs come up with a large cost of additional work caused by having chosen in the past the quickest solution rather than the most effective one (_technical debt_).

> When working on the implementation of new features, you should think carefully about the design of your solution and assess it with the following principles in mind:
> 
> 1. Look at each piece of code and ask yourself: _Would I point to this in a job interview as an example of well crafted code according to my best abilities?_
> 2. If it isn't tested and verified, it isn't scientific. This is a scientific software library.
> 3. Separate concerns: any unit of code should have one concern and one only. The implementation details of any unit of code should not be known to any other unit of code.
> 4. Do not repeat yourself ([DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself)): always check if functionality already exists elsewhere in the project before implementing it. Also recognize when multiple specific implementations of an algorithm can be replaced with a single generic one.
> 5. Do not reinvent the wheel: instead of writing a new component to solve a problem consider existing solutions.
> 6. Names should state the intent of code objects. If the intent of a code expression **might** not be immediately obvious it deserves a name which makes it obvious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep technical debt at acceptable levels, follow best practices when designing and implementing new features:

1. Make sure all your code is covered by automatic testing to ensure its correctness. Where unit tests are impractical, use integration tests.
2. Adhere to the [SOLID](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_(object-oriented_design)) principles of software design.
3. Do not repeat yourself: you may copy-paste once, but if you are writing down the same code pattern the third time you should extract it into a function.
4. You ain't gonna need it: don't design solutions for problems that you think might come up in the future, chances are you will never need that code. Focus on the current problems and prepare for future requirements by writing clean code that's easy to refactor.
5. Do not reinvent the wheel: if someone else solved your problem within the project or in a third party library, consider using it or extending it before reinventing the wheel.
6. Give your objects a meaningful name: classes should be nouns, functions should be verbs, and in all cases the name should make the object's purpose clear. Stay away from meaningless names like *manager*, *data*, or *info*.
```

> Remember that important design decisions should be documented as reference for the future and to share the knowledge with all the developers. We decided to use lightweight _Architecture Decision Records_ (ADRs) for this purpose. The whole list of ADRs and documentation about when and how to write new ones can be found in [docs/functional/architecture/Index.md](docs/functional/architecture/Index.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that important design decisions should be documented as reference for the future and to share the knowledge with other the developers. We decided to use lightweight _Architecture Decision Records_ (ADRs) for this purpose. The whole list of ADRs and documentation about when and how to write new ones can be found in [docs/functional/architecture/Index.md](docs/functional/architecture/Index.md).
```

Sphinx supports [reStructuredText][sphinx-rest] (reST) markup language to add additional formatting options to the generated docs, however section [_3.8 Comments and Docstrings_](https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html#38-comments-and-docstrings) in the Google Python Style Guide does not define how to use markups in docstrings. Therefore, we decided to forbid the use of reST markup in docstrings except for:

   - Cross-referencing other objects using Sphinx text roles for the [Python domain](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/domains.html#the-python-domain) (as explained [here](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/domains.html#python-roles)).   
   - Very basic formatting markup to improve _readability_ of the generated documentation without obscuring the source docstring (e.g. ``` ``literal`` ```  strings).
   
Regarding code examples in docstrings, we highly encourage to use [doctest][doctest] format to automatically test they are in sync with the code.

### Module structure

> In general, you should structure new Python modules in the following way:

Reviewer: I miss sizing guidelines. How much stuff are you supposed to put in a module before it's really a problem? 400 lines? At some point you have to split it into multiple modules instead of multiple sections.

Author: I don't think it is possible to come up with a meaningful rule in terms of number of lines. I think the discussions to decide if a module should be split into several belong to the review process.

> In general, you should structure new Python modules in the following way:

Author: Yes, it could be a valid option. I personally prefer to keep the section as text to force people to read it and focus, instead of skimming through a template-like example.

1. (Only for **executable scripts**) _shebang_ line: `#! /usr/bin/env python3`.
2. License header boilerplate (check `LICENSE_HEADER.txt`).
3. Module docstring.
4. Imports, alphabetically ordered within each block:
   1. Block of imports from the standard library.
   2. Block of imports from general third party libraries using standard shortcuts when customary (e.g. `numpy as np`).
   3. Block of imports from specific modules of the project.
5. (Optional, mainly for re-exporting symbols from other modules) Definition of exported symbols:   
```python
__all__ = ["func_a", "CONST_B"]
   ```
6. Public constant and typing definitions.
7. Module contents organized in a meaningful way for reading and understanding the module, usually defining functions before classes.

> Try to keep sections and items within sections ordered logically, adding comments to make it explicit if needed (also in configuration files). If there is not one single evident logical order, just pick the order you consider best or use alphabetical order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try to keep sections and items within sections ordered logically, add section comments to further separate sections when needed. If there is not one single evident logical order, just pick the order you consider best or use alphabetical order.
```
Discuss configuration files in another paragraph?

### Ignoring QA errors

> You may ocassionally need to disable checks from _quality assurance_  (QA) tools (e.g. linters, type checkers, etc.) on specific lines because the tool is not able to fully understand why that piece of code is needed. This is usually feasible inlining a special comment like `# type: ignore`. You should **only** ignore QA errors when you fully understand its cause and it is not reasonable to fix it by rewriting the offending code in a different way. Additionally, you should add a brief comment to make sure anyone else reading the code also understands what is happening there. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may ocassionally need to disable checks from _quality assurance_  (QA) tools (e.g. linters, type checkers, etc.) on specific lines because the tool is not able to fully understand why that piece of code is needed. This is usually done by a special comment like `# type: ignore`. You should **only** ignore QA errors when you fully understand its cause and rewriting it to pass QA checks would actually make it less readable. Additionally, you should add a brief comment to make sure anyone else reading the code also understands what is happening there. For example:
```

   ```python
   f = lambda: 'empty'  # noqa: E731  # assign lambda expression for testing
   ```

## Testing 

> Testing components is a critical part of a software development project. We follow standard practices in software development and write unit, integration and regression tests. Note that even [doctests][doctest] are great for documentation purposes, they lack many features and are not easy to debug. Hence, they should not be used as replacement for proper unit tests except for trivial cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testing components is a critical part of a software development project. We follow standard practices in software development and write unit, integration and regression tests. Note that even though [doctests][doctest] are great for documentation, they lack many features and are difficult to debug. As a consequence, they should not be used as replacement for proper unit tests except for trivial cases.
```
